Add default for model (#183)
andycroll/andycroll.com: _posts/2023/2023-03-13-assign-a-default-to-an-attribute-active-record.md

---
title: "Assign a default value to an attribute in Active Record"
description: "You’ve probably been using callbacks. Don’t."
layout: article
category: ruby
image:
  base: '2023/assign-default-to-an-attribute-active-record'
  alt: "Blank wood"
  credit: "Keith Misner"
  source: "https://unsplash.com/photos/h0Vxgz5tyXA"

---

> If you ever needed to set a default value in an Active Record model, you probably used a callback.

Reviewer: *in an instance of?

Author: ```suggestion
If you ever needed to set a default value in an instance of an Active Record model, you probably used a callback.
```

> Since Rails 5.0 there’s [been a better way](https://edgeguides.rubyonrails.org/5_0_release_notes.html#active-record-attributes-api). I had missed it until recently (thanks [Moses](https://twitter.com/Gathukumose/status/1615298667031797760)!).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since Rails 5.0 there’s [been a better way](https://edgeguides.rubyonrails.org/5_0_release_notes.html#active-record-attributes-api). I had missed it until recently! (Thanks [Moses](https://twitter.com/Gathukumose/status/1615298667031797760)!)
```

## Instead of…

…assigning a default value in a callback:

```ruby
class Message
  before_validation :assign_delivered_at

  # ...

  private

  def assign_delivered_at
    delivered_at ||= Time.zone.now
  end
end
```

## Use…

> …the attribute API from Active Record:

Reviewer: *`attribute` or Attribute?

Author: ```suggestion
…the Attribute API from Active Record:
```

```ruby
class Message
  attribute :delivered_at, default: -> { Time.zone.now }

  # ...
end
```

## Why?

> Callbacks can be confusing to understand even when there's a good reason to use them. Generally the less you use them the less surprises you’ll have at a later date.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Callbacks can be confusing to understand even when there's a good reason to use them. Generally, the less you use them the fewer surprises you’ll have at a later date.
```

> This more recent API is terser, clearer and _the way_ Rails recommends to execute this behaviour.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `attribute` API is terser, clearer and _the way_ Rails recommends to execute this behaviour.
```

> The `attribute` API is terser, clearer and _the way_ Rails recommends to execute this behaviour.

Reviewer: Not 'Attribute API' like the other times? Unless you wanna say `attribute` syntax instead?

Author: ```suggestion
The `attribute` syntax is terser, clearer and _the way_ Rails recommends to execute this behaviour.
```

> There’s a lot more going on [in the Attributes API](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Attributes/ClassMethods.html)—Dirty tracking, type casting, attributes not backed by the database—but in this case we’re only using the default-setting capability.

Reviewer: Oh, "Attributes API" — then that's what it should be everywhere else before!

And then: *There's a lot more going on in this API— change tracking (instead of Dirty for those that don't know? Or is it commonly known? Would it be capitalised?), type casting...

Author: ```suggestion
There’s a lot more going on [in this API](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Attributes/ClassMethods.html)—attribute changes tracking, type casting, adding attributes not backed by the database—but in this case we’re only using the default-setting capability.
```

## Why not?

> Ideally, from a data integrity perspective, it'd be good to set these defaults in the database schema.

Reviewer: *it'd be better

Author: ```suggestion
Ideally, from a data integrity perspective, it'd be better to set these defaults in the database schema.
```

> Using a database default means a call to `Model.new` will have the database’s default value set in the unsaved model, so you may not need this approach.

Reviewer: Surely it will have it, so then you won't need this approach..?

Author: ```suggestion
Setting a default at the database level means Active Record will pull that value into a new, unsaved, model, so you may not need this approach.
```

> Setting a default at the database level means Active Record will pull that value into a new, unsaved, model, so you may not need this approach.

Reviewer: *so you'd then be unlikely to need this approach. ?

Author: ```suggestion
Setting a default at the database level means Active Record will pull that value into a new, unsaved, model, so you’d be unlikely to need this approach.
```

> Additionally, beware that setting a default in this way in the Active Record model will overwrite any default set in the database when you call `Model.new`.

Reviewer: But if you have it in the DB schema, you shouldn't also be doing this recommendation, right?

Author: ```suggestion
Additionally, beware that setting a default in this way in the Active Record model will overwrite any default set in the database when you call `Model.new`. Active Record already pulls defaults from your database schema, so you don’t need to specify here as well.
```

> Additionally, beware that setting a default in this way in the Active Record model will overwrite any default set in the database when you call `Model.new`. Active Record already pulls defaults from your database schema, so you don’t need to specify here as well.

Author: ```suggestion
Additionally, beware that setting a default in this way in the Active Record model will _overwrite_ any default set in the database when you call `Model.new`. Unless you're deliberately changing the default in using Rails you don’t need to specify using the Attributes API as well.
```

> Additionally, beware that setting a default in this way in the Active Record model will _overwrite_ any default set in the database when you call `Model.new`. Unless you're deliberately changing the default in using Rails you don’t need to specify using the Attributes API as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, beware that setting a default in the Active Record model, as shown earlier, will _overwrite_ any default set in the database when you call `Model.new`. Unless you're deliberately looking to change the default when using Rails you don’t need to specify one using the Attribute API as well.
```
